# Essay on the tributary relationship between private and public in a capitalist economy

Milton Friedman's expenditure tax is a state of art tool to reform the tax code. As a form of consumption tax, it is naturally regressive, but being charged by individual it can be levied with a progressive rate, neutralizing that problem. Its greatest implementation in the real world quickly ran aground when the poorest were encumbered with a tax payment regime made for the richer social strata that can afford both to eat and pay taxes. That problem could be counteracted with advance payment made through value-added tax, so instead of saving for a large tax payment, the poorest would actually get a Christmas bonus with their own money, and only the ones that lived well above the means of their peers would have to have to complement its payment. Robert H. Frank argues that a heavily progressive expenditure tax running parallel to an income tax would not only solve the high regressivity problem of current consumption taxes, but strongly disincentive the kind of extravagance that create waste and inefficiency. Citizens of Utopia would approve of such tax, while still expressing dismay for a subtle whip filling the void of ethics and solidarity (they are committed epicureans and socialists).

This article is not about any tax or tax at all, but about the whole financial dynamics between public and private in the capitalist mode of production. The capitalist class is constantly at odds with government meddling in the private sector, while the government do not miss a day in the job of helping it at the expense of the lower strata of society, muted by ignorance of its own condition. The only conclusion we can draw from that is that the bureaucratic machine is juggling expectations, avoiding the revealing light of decisiveness by hiding in the impenetrable shadow that is the complexity of a system.

Like evolution, genetics and capitalism, a liberal democracy is a system that is self-correcting and it is left to do so because the cost of controlling the insurmountable complexity is worse than the entropy of the self-correcting process. While bureaucracy fails to account for its systematicity, the choice will be between a prone to fail central planning with guaranteed tragic consequences and the dehumanization of the randomness and inevitability of the laissez-faire's entropy. The ultimate loser in either case will always be the lower strata.

To realistically improve a system without restricting it or weakening it more than one should, we have to use the divide and conquer strategy. Government is the embodiment of many different public functions that must be funded and may directly affect how the market is organized. If we forge a new layer around that relationship between private and public sectors, engulfing every one of its connections, we can immediately reduce the connections between government and this new layer to just one and between government and the market to zero.

More than an independent agency of revenue service, this new bureaucratic body must have exclusive legislative and executive mandates to give or take money from the private sector in all levels of government. It can not allow or ban anything, but it alone can say how much it costs to do it and who has to pay for it. Its only imperative is to provide its state clients with the money they require.

It can get rid of tax regressivity with exclusive control of types of taxes and rates. It can get rid of hidden taxes with exclusive control over interest rates and government assets. It can get rid of hidden welfare state and tax evasion by removing exceptions and loopholes from the taxes. It can guarantee minimal income and healthcare through minimum wages and benefits or through welfare schemes. It can redistribute tax between sub-national entities by changing the ratio of taxation to expenditure. It can eliminate sovereign debt by increasing tax rates above expenditure.
