# Essay on the transparency of Brazilian labour laws concerning pay

The law governing labour is called CLT, the standard CLT regime is used by most formal workers in the private sector and it is considered a standard by which informal workers calculate their own benefits. Payrolls in the CLT are monthly, and income tax (IRPF), social security (INSS) and union dues are deducted from the payroll. Besides the safety net and union protection, there are three other benefits that CLT workers are entitled to. Every 12 months, 30 days of paid vacation with a bonus of 1/3 of a month's salary. In December, a Christmas bonus of 1 month's salary or proportional to the number of months of employment in the year. A mandatory savings account called FGTS is deducted from payroll and with few exceptions, can only be withdrawn if the employee was fired (in that case only the FGTS paid during that period of employment can be withdrawn) or retired.

In summary, it is very comforting for the employees, but prospectives employees and prospective employers alike seek to get around CLT when possible, not without reason. The cost of the system may seem like a minor problem if we compare to the effective tax rate paid by the lower classes in Brazil's strongly regressive tax code. Brazilians may be accepting of Draconian laws such as the mandate on savings, even if at the same time they are very prone to disregard whatever laws they can. Something that the Brazilian culture does not admit is complexity, Brazilians tend to look for the easier way because of the common misconception that simple and easy are interchangeable. Simplism dominates the political discourse, with populists of left and right charming large swaths of the electorate. Those promises never come to fruition, as Brazilians are conservatives that preach of better days, but violently oppose any deep reform. But however unlikely, Brazilians are not only welcoming, but forever expecting the day where all government things will be more accessible to their understanding and consumption. Unlike populist politicians, I will try to review payroll to simplify it without loss for neither employees or employers under CLT.

Let's suppose that I earn 1,000 BRL (Brazilian Real) a month. This salary pays the lowest rate for social security and does not pay income tax. Let's start with two rights of the worker, paid vacation and Christmas bonus. This Christmas bonus is called 13th salary and is proportional to the months worked in the year. Paid vacation is a right not to work during 30 days that if sold would allow the worker to receive twice for the same period. Both cases it is blatantly obvious that there is no immediate relationship between the payment and actual work, the worker is still entitled to it, even in case of termination. This means that paid vacation and 13th salary are in practice not benefits for the employee, but for the employer, as it allows for delayed payment for the worker's labour. If those values are claimed before they are legally due, the worker gets them discounted, while their application according to the CLT does not award interests to the employee, nor is adjusted for inflation because of the lateness of their payment. If we reincorporate those two forms of payment into the salary, equivalent to 2.33 months of employment per year, we add to the salary 194.44 BRL. This will incur costs to the company, not the value per se that is already paid, but this change will stop the current practice that allows the company to earn interests and inflation on that money without passing on to the worker. The worker will still have the right to stay home for 30 days and he will still be able to sell it, only now for its real value of 1,194.44 BRL, not 1,000 BRL.

The INSS is a government agency that provides retirement and disability pensions, it is the largest component of the social safety net in Brazil and the only one based on the payroll. The rate for a salary of 1,000 BRL is 8% deducted from payroll plus 20% of the salary payed directly by the employer. People have to pay for social security, no argument there, but since the payment made by the company is tied to the payroll, it affects employment opportunities and remuneration, therefore it is a tax paid by the employee without their knowledge. A salary of 1,000 BRL pays 80 BRL already from the payroll plus 200 BRL outside, internalizing this payment the salary goes up to 1200 BRL and to keep the same payment the new rate is 23.33% (280 / 1200). Without loopholes and discounts, an individual would have to earn 18958.75 BRL a month to pay that same effective rate in income tax. It is amazing that every worker is charged that much without it being displayed in their payroll and unlike income tax, there are no hidden welfare state (discounts and loopholes) like the one that allows top earners and even billionaires to pay close to nothing in taxes. Paid vacation and 13th salary also incur the same taxes, so the effective rate is the same rate. When we incorporate that income, our salary is 1,433.28 BRL (1,194.44 + 20%), of which 23.33%, or 334.44 BRL is deducted by the INSS.

The FGTS is a forced savings account that is supposed to be used by workers only in time of distress. This contribution is based on all payroll income, including paid vacation and 13th salary, but it is paid directly by the employer with a rate of 8%. Following the same logic as for INSS, let's update the salary and rates. Salary becomes 1,080 BRL and the rate is 7.41% (80 / 1080). FGTS is collected with same rate on paid vacation and 13th salary. When we incorporate those, the salary is 1,290 BRL (1,194.44 + 8%), of which 7.41%, or 95.56 BRL is deducted by the FGTS.

Combining all changes, the salary is 1,528.89 BRL, with a 21.88% rate of INSS and a 6.25% rate of FGTS, leaving 1,098.89 BRL of after-taxes wage. The gain and the taxes are still the same, but now they are transparent. A salary of 2,000 BRL would become 3,057.78 BRL, with a 22.66% rate of INSS, a 6.25% rate of FGTS, and 1.66% (effective rate) of income tax, leaving 2,123.03 BRL after taxes. A salary of 3,000 BRL would become 4,586.67 BRL, with a 24.22% rate of INSS, a 6.25% rate of FGTS, and 4.73% (effective rate) of income tax, leaving 2,972.27 BRL after taxes.

Two very interesting properties of wage earning surface as result of transparency. The first is that besides the known regressivity of consumption taxes, wage earners in Brazil have very high payroll taxes that not only foment informality and increase the deficit of social security, but also allow richer people that do not earn their money in wage to pay much lower and more flexible income taxes, widening the gap of social inequality. The second one is that, while the transparency will keep the relative differences of salary the same, it will display a slightly greater disparity in absolute wages. Since workers tend to seek compensations closer to those of other people doing the same job, they may attempt to return to the same absolute differences forcing the relative differences of wages to be reduced.
