# Essay on the matrix of disciplines of the basic education

Kahneman earned a Nobel prize by checking fundamental assumptions of mainstream economics, millions died in the last two centuries fighting against wage slavery. Yet we still live by those precepts because of our pretense of objectivity. We praise measurability and comparability to the point of simplifying our world view, and even changing our world to match that hyperreality at the expense of real progress. Our formal education is molded through that same utilitarian process.

In a traditional school system (non-vocationalized), the utility function of the basic education is the matrix of disciplines covered in exams for college admission and civil service, like the SAT in the United States. This matrix is a long list of modules of knowledge and skills split by disciplines. Students are expected to know 2 or 3 fourths of the total knowledge and skills with at least a minimum knowledge in each area. That is what they are tested for when they apply for civil service and college, so that is what schools are supposed to teach. Anything outside that matrix is not essential unless mandated by law, thus a nuisance to the students and a waste to its funders. For example, in a for-profit vocational school it would be a bad business practice to teach natural sciences and social sciences.

To maximize the probability of its students getting the required scores, modules are split in grades and disciplines and students are required to get that score in each one of them. That means that for every discipline and every set of modules, teachers have to emulate the standardized test, but in a much more informal and distributed way.

This is the current state and if we ignore the evidence against its performance it seems like a plausible system to teach math and natural sciences. By further examining these very scientifical disciplines, one could easily make the case for more modularization and more standardization. One could perhaps make a case for systems to automate most of a math teacher's work. I believe all of those things are likely to greatly improve the teaching of math and natural sciences and also in several aspects of social sciences and languages. If utilitarianism is such a perfect fit for math, one should question how compatible it can ever be with every other aspect of education.

Thinking subjectively about education, I say the goal of language education is to create effective communicators, instead of the utilitarian goal of being admitted into college, getting a good job or entering civil service, even if the standards were high enough to both mean the same thing. Following the standardized framework, a matrix is created with a first language and a second language, further broken down by structural components with a few extras included into the first language. One could have a idea of how effective the examinations are by seeing how much they differ from Cambridge English Language Assesment, a set of standardized examinations for English as a Second Language. We are still being oversimplistic for the much broader 'effective communicator' goal, that should ideally include first-language acquisition, second-language acquisition, sign language, logic and rhetoric.

I demonstrated that our language education possess a insuficcient set of skills to meet its goal. In the current framework, that means blindly adding more modules, more disciplines, more grades, further complicating a system already troubled. English as a Second Language in Brazilian basic schools are a perfect example of the system failure, both in procedure and results. To achieve satisfactory results, the format must satisfy its own nature, it must be repurposed to the subjective goal. Specificity beats objectivity, even if it means stopping examinations altogether. Objectivity here is a tool that measures with an incredible decimal precision something that is not even a number. The comprehension of one language feeds onto the next and also back to the already known, reading lots of books can further enhance skills in the whole set. Schools are very ill prepared to tackle subjective properties such as those while dependent on the matrix.

Thinking subjectively about education, I say the goal of social sciences is to create effective citizens. While the ignorance of a few major events and lack of a basic understanding of geography may be laughable and probably tragic, because of the subtlety of its contributions beyond that point, it is hard to say which are the best things to know and how much. We have been grossly underserved in that area in terms of quality and coverage. Students finish basic education knowing a few numbers and dates, without being able to comprehend life and society or to put anything into context. Students leave school being able to vote without knowing a thing about political science or even basic ethics. The intricate relationship between the several social sciences is completely discarded by the matrix, making the education of social sciences completely useless as anything other than an indoctrination tool. With such goal, the stakes are very high and its failure strongly hampers progress of society.

I evaluated the effectivity of the current system to match natural expectations of math, natural sciences, social sciences and language, but I couldn't delve into disciplines that are not considered for either college admission or civil service, thus lack any utility function and are considered expendable by the main framework. The main conclusion is that the basic education needs to be humanized, schools should not be seen as factories and students should not be seen as goods. The problem of the utilitarian system starts with its users, college admission and civil service examination must be reformed to destroy the expectations that bring about the utility function. To get rid of vocational schools, better business management should end the demand for one-dimensional professionals. Without a demand for it, the matrix of knowledge should be turned into a few independent flexible graphs for each area of study, with an adaptable set of vertices and as many edges as necessary with content in themselves.
